##### Rini Gupta, Jacinta Das, Kimya Shirazi
##### Applied Time Series Analysis
##### Professor Davis 
#### Final Project Proposal

#### For the independent research project, we plan to examine the application of time series analysis to a sample of the song “Baby’s Tears Blues” from the album Mother Earth's Plantasia. Released in 1976, the electronic album by Mort Garson was specifically composed for plants to listen to (Paul, 2019). The song “Baby’s Tears Blues” was composed with a Moog synthesizer and is set to a jazzy swing beat with background synth which creates a cartoonish style more fitting for a plant audience (Paul). By applying time series analysis to this song, we can extract key pieces of information that could offer insight on what constitutes a song that is believed to assist plant growth. To aid our exploration of this topic, we plan to include a second audio sample from a rock song to contrast the “Baby’s Tears Blues” (our song of primary focus), as jazz is believed to be effective for plant growth whereas rock is typically viewed as ineffective. We chose Queen’s “We Will Rock You” as the rock song comparison because of its strong beat, which contrasts well with “Baby’s Tears Blues.”
#### Our interest in plant growth and previous reading on the effect of music on plant growth inspired us to choose this topic. Although much of the literature we have been exposed to is not academic, it is our hope that our project will further explore some of the ideas we saw discussed. One passionate blogger and gardener wrote that she played music for her plants and claimed that they experienced “faster growth, earlier blooms, increased yields, improved nutrition, and reduced pest pressure” (Neverman, 2019). She thinks that the plants may interpret music with a strong beat as wind and respond by bulking while they interpret gentle music as bird song (Neverman, 2019). The author reported her tomatoes were 2.5 larger and vegetable yield was 40% larger. She also reported a faster maturity time and “longer lasting and more abundant flowers” (Neverman, 2019). Based on an experiment conducted by “Mythbusters” on plant growth and sound, it appears that plants grow better when exposed to sound. However, their study did not examine the effect of musical noise specifically on plants. 
#### There has been some research conducted on the effect of music on plants. Plant enthusiasts on Bloomscape wrote an interesting and informative article detailing the history of investigation into the topic. Dr. T.C. Singh at Annamalai University “exposed balsam plants to classical music and found that their growth rate increased by 20% compared to a control group, along with a 72% increase in biomass.” Although our project unfortunately will not be able to explore the effect of music on plants, it could uncover differences between the two chosen songs which could help researchers hypothesize effects on plants for future research on the topic. 
#### The song designed for plants may have distinct characteristics compared with the other songs. We would like to identify what makes it unique to develop potential explanations for why the plant song is superior for aiding plant growth. To read in the audio files, we will reference the code snippet and ensure we are able to get the songs in .mp3 format. We can find the sampling rate and number of samples. We can also turn the sample into a time series object to look for patterns within the music. We will compare the patterns between the songs in an effort to identify key differences. We also plan to explore frequencies and tone and plot both the tone and frequency content. The methodology to explore the frequency domain would involve using R to perform a Fourier transform, plotting a periodogram, and writing helper functions to determine the dominant frequencies and/or see how that relates to the notes being played. The frequency domain also can provide information on periodicity/aperiodicity. Finally, plotting the two songs as time series may provide a visual comparison to inform further research on what components of a song may affect plant growth. 
